Python is the most used language in top companies such as Intel, IBM, NASA, Pixar, Netflix, Facebook, JP Morgan Chase, Spotify, and many more because of its performance and its powerful libraries. To get into these companies and organizations as a Python developer, you need to master some important Python Interview Questions to crack their Python Online Assessment Round and Python Interview Round. We have prepared a list of the Top 50 Python Interview Questions along with their answers to ace interviews.
Supercharge your Python interview success with our Python course here you will get all the insights into Python programming and a practice set that will help you leverage your Python skills.
Table of Content
Python is a widely-used general-purpose, high-level programming language. It was created by Guido van Rossum in 1991 and further developed by the Python Software Foundation. It was designed with an emphasis on code readability, and its syntax allows programmers to express their concepts in fewer lines of code.It is used for:
The following are the benefits of using Python language:
Actually, Python is a partially compiled language and partially interpreted language. The compilation part is done first when we execute our code and this will generate byte code internally this byte code gets converted by the Python virtual machine(p.v.m) according to the underlying platform(machine+operating system).
‘#’ is used to comment on everything that comes after on the line.
Mutable data types can be edited i.e., they can change at runtime. Eg – List, Dictionary, etc.Immutable data types can not be edited i.e., they can not change at runtime. Eg – String, Tuple, etc.
Everything in Python is an object and all variables hold references to the objects. The reference values are according to the functions; as a result, you cannot change the value of the references. However, you can change the objects if it is mutable.
The set is an unordered collection of data types that is iterable, mutable and has no duplicate elements.A dictionary in Python is an ordered collection of data values, used to store data values like a map.
List comprehension is a syntax construction to ease the creation of a list based on existing iterable.
For Example:
A lambda function is an anonymous function. This function can have any number of parameters but, can have just one statement. For Example:
Pass means performing no operation or in other words, it is a placeholder in the compound statement, where there should be a blank left and nothing has to be written there.
/ represents precise division (result is a floating point number) whereas // represents floor division (result is an integer). For Example:
There are 3 main keywords i.e. try, except, and finally which are used to catch exceptions and handle the recovering mechanism accordingly. Try is the block of a code that is monitored for errors. Except block gets executed when an error occurs.
The beauty of the final block is to execute the code after trying for an error. This block gets executed irrespective of whether an error occurred or not. Finally, block is used to do the required cleanup activities of objects/variables.
It is a string’s function that converts all uppercase characters into lowercase and vice versa. It is used to alter the existing case of the string. This method creates a copy of the string which contains all the characters in the swap case. For Example:
The “for” Loop is generally used to iterate through the elements of various collection types such as List, Tuple, Set, and Dictionary. Developers use a “for” loop where they have both the conditions start and the end. Whereas, the “while” loop is the actual looping feature that is used in any other programming language. Programmers use a Python while loop where they just have the end conditions.
Yes, Several arguments can be passed to a function, including objects, variables (of the same or distinct data types), and functions. Functions can be passed as parameters to other functions because they are objects. Higher-order functions are functions that can take other functions as arguments.
To read more, refer to the article: Passing function as an argument in Python
To pass a variable number of arguments to a function in Python, use the special syntax *args and **kwargs in the function specification. It is used to pass a variable-length, keyword-free argument list. By using the *, the variable we associate with the * becomes iterable, allowing you to do operations on it such as iterating over it and using higher-order operations like map and filter.
Yes, indentation is required in Python. A Python interpreter can be informed that a group of statements belongs to a specific block of code by using Python indentation. Indentations make the code easy to read for developers in all programming languages but in Python, it is very important to indent the code in a specific order.
The location where we can find a variable and also access it if required is called the scope of a variable.
Python documentation strings (or docstrings) provide a convenient way of associating documentation with Python modules, functions, classes, and methods.
Typed languages are the languages in which we define the type of data type and it will be known by the machine at the compile-time or at runtime. Typed languages can be classified into two categories:
The break statement is used to terminate the loop or statement in which it is present. After that, the control will pass to the statements that are present after the break statement, if available.
Continue is also a loop control statement just like the break statement. continue statement is opposite to that of the break statement, instead of terminating the loop, it forces to execute the next iteration of the loop.
Pass means performing no operation or in other words, it is a placeholder in the compound statement, where there should be a blank left and nothing has to be written there.
The following are the standard or built-in data types in Python:
The Python math module includes a method that can be used to calculate the floor of a number. 
range() and xrange() are two functions that could be used to iterate a certain number of times in for loops in Python. In Python 3, there is no xrange, but the range function behaves like xrange in Python 2.
Dictionary Comprehension is a syntax construction to ease the creation of a dictionary based on the existing iterable.
For Example: my_dict = {i:i+7 for i in range(1, 10)}
Tuple comprehension is not possible in Python because it will end up in a generator, not a tuple comprehension.
Let’s analyze the differences between List and Tuple:
List
Tuple
Shallow copy is used when a new instance type gets created and it keeps values that are copied whereas deep copy stores values that are already copied.
A shallow copy has faster program execution whereas a deep copy makes it slow.
Python uses the Tim Sort algorithm for sorting. It’s a stable sorting whose worst case is O(N log N). It’s a hybrid sorting algorithm, derived from merge sort and insertion sort, designed to perform well on many kinds of real-world data.
Decorators are a very powerful and useful tool in Python as they are the specific change that we make in Python syntax to alter functions easily.
By using this command we can debug a Python program:
In Python, iterators are used to iterate a group of elements, containers like a list. Iterators are collections of items, and they can be a list, tuples, or a dictionary. Python iterator implements __itr__ and the next() method to iterate the stored elements. We generally use loops to iterate over the collections (list, tuple) in Python.
In Python, the generator is a way that specifies how to implement iterators. It is a normal function except that it yields expression in the function. It does not implement __itr__ and next() method and reduces other overheads as well.
If a function contains at least a yield statement, it becomes a generator. The yield keyword pauses the current execution by saving its states and then resumes from the same when required.
Python does support multiple inheritances, unlike Java. Multiple inheritances mean that a class can be derived from more than one parent class.
Polymorphism means the ability to take multiple forms. So, for instance, if the parent class has a method named ABC then the child class also can have a method with the same name ABC having its own parameters and variables. Python allows polymorphism.
Encapsulation means binding the code and the data together. A Python class is an example of encapsulation.
Data Abstraction is providing only the required details and hides the implementation from the world. It can be achieved in Python by using interfaces and abstract classes.
Python uses its private heap space to manage the memory. Basically, all the objects and data structures are stored in the private heap space. Even the programmer can not access this private space as the interpreter takes care of this space. Python also has an inbuilt garbage collector, which recycles all the unused memory and frees the memory and makes it available to the heap space.
We can delete a file using Python by following approaches:
Python Slicing is a string operation for extracting a part of the string, or some part of a list. With this operator, one can specify where to start the slicing, where to end, and specify the step. List slicing returns a new list from the existing list.
A namespace is a naming system used to make sure that names are unique to avoid naming conflicts.
PIP is an acronym for Python Installer Package which provides a seamless interface to install various Python modules. It is a command-line tool that can search for packages over the internet and install them without any user interaction.
Python zip() function returns a zip object, which maps a similar index of multiple containers. It takes an iterable, converts it into an iterator and aggregates the elements based on iterables passed. It returns an iterator of tuples.
The Pickle module accepts any Python object and converts it into a string representation and dumps it into a file by using the dump function, this process is called pickling. While the process of retrieving original Python objects from the stored string representation is called unpickling.
In Python, the term monkey patch only refers to dynamic modifications of a class or module at run-time.
Equivalent to constructors in OOP terminology, __init__ is a reserved method in Python classes. The __init__ method is called automatically whenever a new object is initiated. This method allocates memory to the new object as soon as it is created. This method can also be used to initialize variables.
Python uses the ‘_’ symbol to determine the access control for a specific data member or a member function of a class. A Class in Python has three types of Python access modifiers:
Unit Testing is the first level of software testing where the smallest testable parts of the software are tested. This is used to validate that each unit of the software performs as designed. The unit test framework is Python’s xUnit style framework. The White Box Testing method is used for Unit testing.
Python Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) is a type of process lock that is used by Python whenever it deals with processes. Generally, Python only uses only one thread to execute the set of written statements. The performance of the single-threaded process and the multi-threaded process will be the same in Python and this is because of GIL in Python. We can not achieve multithreading in Python because we have a global interpreter lock that restricts the threads and works as a single thread.
Function Annotation is a feature that allows you to add metadata to function parameters and return values. This way you can specify the input type of the function parameters and the return type of the value the function returns.
Function annotations are arbitrary Python expressions that are associated with various parts of functions. These expressions are evaluated at compile time and have no life in Python’s runtime environment. Python does not attach any meaning to these annotations. They take life when interpreted by third-party libraries, for example, mypy.
The latest feature of Python 3.11, Exception Groups. The ExceptionGroup can be handled using a new except* syntax. The * symbol indicates that multiple exceptions can be handled by each except* clause.
ExceptionGroup is a collection/group of different kinds of Exception. Without creating Multiple Exceptions we can group together different Exceptions which we can later fetch one by one whenever necessary, the order in which the Exceptions are stored in the Exception Group doesn’t matter while calling them.
From version 3.10 upward, Python has implemented a switch case feature called “structural pattern matching”. You can implement this feature with the match and case keywords. Note that the underscore symbol is what you use to define a default case for the switch statement in Python.
Note: Before Python 3.10 Python doesn’t support match Statements.
The Walrus Operator allows you to assign a value to a variable within an expression. This can be useful when you need to use a value multiple times in a loop, but don’t want to repeat the calculation.
The Walrus Operator is represented by the `:=` syntax and can be used in a variety of contexts including while loops and if statements.
Note: Python versions before 3.8 doesn’t support Walrus Operator.




